# Evaluation of VLM models on peripheral blood cytomorphology

This is a repository for automated evaluation of VLM models on peripheral blood cytomorphology.

## Contents

- dataset_info_and_paths.py: contains functions that return paths to datasets, results folders, etc.
- prepare_dataset.py: contains functions that samples a smaller subset of a large data set for the VLM evaluation
- prompts.py: contains a function that returns the suitable prompt for the chosen task
- run_api_inquiry.py: contains function that runs the VLM models API inquiry. Also contains a function that runs API enquiry to review the VLM models answers
- clean_llama_answers.py: contains function that cleans the LLM answers
- plot_conf_mat.py: contains function that plots the confusion matrix and generates a report

Subfolder vlm_models contains the VLM models API inquiry codes for each model.

## Requirements

See requirements.txt

## Usage

### Adding a new dataset

To add a new dataset for evaluation:

1. Add dataset info to `dataset_info_and_paths.py`:
    - Follow the pattern of previous datasets to enter:
        - paths to original dataset and annotations
        - column names for labels and image paths
        - which classes/labels to include
        - any dataset-specific configuration
        - ...

2. Create prompts in `prompts.py`:
   - Add structured and unstructured prompts for the dataset
   - Ensure prompts match the dataset's labeling scheme

3. Generate the evaluation subset:
   - Choose n_per_label - the number of samples per class
   - Run: `python prepare_dataset.py --dataset_name <name> --n_per_label <n>`

### Adding a new VLM model family

To add a new VLM model family for evaluation:

1. Add a new api inquiry code file to the vlm_models folder. Call it <<model_name>>_api.py.
It needs to contain two functions:
    - <<gpt>>_api_visual_inquiry. Takes image_path, prompt_text, vlm_name as inputs and returns the answer and token usage.
    - <<gpt>>_api_text_inquiry. Takes prompt_text, vlm_name as inputs and returns the answer and token usage.
See gpt_api.py for an example.

2. Add the model to the get_review_model function in dataset_info_and_paths.py - specify which model to use for reviewing the 
answers generated by the VLM model you're adding. If you believe that the model is strong enough, use itself, otherwise use gpt-4o.

3. Import the model in the run_api_inquiry.py file. Add the model to the if clauses in run_api_inquiry and run_api_review functions.

### Adding a new task

Modify the prompts.py file to add a new task. Also modiy the run_api_inquiry.py

### Running the API call of a model

Run the API call of a model by running run_api_inquiry.py.

### Reporting results

To plot the confusion matrix for a model and a dataset run plot_confusion_matrix in plot_conf_mat.py.

To generate overall report run report_score_metrics in plot_conf_mat.py.



